---
title: "LS 501: Critical Cataloging: An LIS Hot Topic"
bookToc: false
---

William Blackerby

Dr. Jeff Weddle

LS 501-925

6 October 2021

Critical Cataloging: An LIS Hot Topic

As part of their university libraries' commitment to equity, diversity,
inclusion, and anti-racism, metadata specialists at the University of
Washington published a statement on harmful language in catalog records
and archival finding aids in August of 2021 (Casey et al., "Words
Matter"). UW Libraries' publication of their "Critical Cataloging and
Archival Description" statement takes place in the context of the
ongoing, broader national conversation about equity, diversity, and
inclusion prompted by systemic police violence and killings of unarmed
Black people and brought to a head by the murder of George Floyd by
Minneapolis police officer Derek Chauvin in May of 2020. The statement
is one manifestation of UW Libraries' commitment to equity, diversity,
and inclusion and represents a commitment to transparency in the
library's resource description process. UW Libraries are, of course, not
the first to make such a statement; in fact, their statement references
similar work undertaken in recent years at other academic libraries
including those at Drexel University, Duke University, the University of
Iowa, MIT, and Temple University. At issue in these statements is the
use of racist, sexist, and otherwise harmful terms in standardized,
controlled vocabularies such as the Library of Congress Subject Headings
(LCSH) used to describe library resources. The work of critically
examining and remediating the language used in classification and
cataloging is known as critical cataloging, one element of the broader
field of critical librarianship.

Myriad examples of harmful language used in subject headings and
classifications can be drawn from the library catalog, but one recent,
concrete example is the Library of Congress Subject Heading "Illegal
aliens." In 2014, students at Dartmouth College "petitioned the Library
of Congress (LC) to change the catalog subject heading 'illegal aliens'
to 'undocumented immigrants'" (Ford, "Conscientious Cataloging"). In
2016, after the ALA passed a resolution urging the Library of Congress
to comply with this petition, LC's Policy and Standards Division
cancelled the heading "Illegal aliens," deciding to replace it with the
two headings "Noncitizens" and "Unauthorized immigration" ("Library of
Congress to Cancel the Subject Heading 'Illegal Aliens'"). However, in
June of 2016, because of political pressure from the Republican-led
Congress, LC kept the cancelled heading, which is still in place today
(Ford).

In accordance with the ALA core value of diversity, librarians have
confronted the issue head on in their own institutions by, where
possible, replacing the "Illegal aliens" subject heading with
"Undocumented immigrants" and where not possible, placing the two terms
side by side. According to Sol LÃ³pez, a librarian who implemented these
changes at two academic libraries, changes such as these made at the
local level communicate inclusion to "library users who may have
undocumented status" (Ford). At the Lawrence Public Library in Kansas,
Kate Ray and Emily McDonald made similar changes after viewing a
documentary film titled _Change the Subject_ about Dartmouth students'
efforts to change the LCSH*.* Ray and McDonald completely removed the
"Illegal alien" subject heading from their library's catalog due to
their acute awareness of the harm that such language can cause library
patrons. As Ray says, patrons "think it's our decision to use \[harmful
language\], and that that term is a judgment on them by the people who
work at the library" (Ford). Ray and McDonald's sense of "responsibility
to make \[their\] library as welcoming to as many people as possible" is
a clear reflection of the ALA core value of access, which states that
"information resources...should be readily, equally, and equitably
accessible to all library users" (Ford; "Core Values of Librarianship").

In July of 2016, the same year the Library of Congress announced its
decision to cancel the "Illegal alien" subject heading and then
effectively reversed its decision by not implementing it, LC approved a
proposal to add the subject heading "Asexuality" (Watson 547-548).
Watson's article "'There was Sex but no Sexuality\*:' Critical
Cataloging and the Classification of Asexuality in LCSH" is a valuable
contribution to the literature for a host of reasons, including its
review of literature on critical cataloging and in-depth recounting of
the process by which "Asexuality" was made an official Library of
Congress Subject Heading. Of greater interest, though, is the personal
story of Paige Crowl's own experience as an MLIS student searching for
information about asexuality.

Crowl's search of her university catalog for "asexuality" resulted in
references to "biological works on asexual reproduction and
psychological works on disorders of sexual desire" (qtd. in Watson 550).
Perhaps a librarian could have aided, but Crowl was "too embarrassed to
ask a librarian for help, unsure \[she\] could even explain the
information need \[she\] had to \[her\]self" (qtd. in Watson 550).
Crowl's story is a clear example of the harm that can be caused by the
decisions that create library cataloging and classification systems and
the importance of working to ensure that such systems avoid harmful
language. Even if a friendly, empathetic librarian with expert search
skills is available to help, library patrons may not be aware of this
fact, or may be too scared to ask for help, meaning that the catalog is
often the first and sometimes the only interface patrons have to the
library's resources. If patrons have a harmful or offensive experience
interacting with the catalog, the librarians responsible for stewarding
that catalog have, unintentionally or not, violated their core
professional value of access.

The publication of UW Libraries' statement on "Critical Cataloging and
Archival Description" is just one more recent point on the long and
continuing timeline of the critical study of how information is
organized, categorized, classified, and cataloged in LIS scholarship. In
a tweet on October 1, 2021, Violet Fox, a leader in the critical
cataloging movement, reminded her followers about Frances Yocom, a white
librarian who "wrote about the lack of subject headings for materials
about African-Americans in 1940" (@violetbfox). Fox's tweet quoted
another by librarian Harvey Long about Annette Phinazee, a Black
librarian whose "1961 Columbia University dissertation was a critical
examination of LoC and its cataloging practices" (@harvlong). Along with
Yocom, Watson mentions Black librarian Dorothy Porter who, in building
the Moorland-Spingarn Research Center for black history and culture at
Howard University, "instead of using the Dewey system," which severely
limited how works by Black authors could be classified, "classified
works by genre and author to highlight the foundational role of black
people in all subject areas" (Watson 551; Nunes, "Remembering the Howard
University Librarian Who Decolonized the Way Books Were Catalogued").
Watson also notes that "widespread scholarly discussion" of the "Western
and white-centric nature of cataloging" began "to develop after the
publication of Sanford 'Sandy' Berman's 1971 book _Prejudices and
Antipathies: A Tract on the LC Subject Heads Concerning People_" (Watson
551).

The decisions made and actions taken by the practicing librarians
mentioned above to revise the language in LCSH and, when that wasn't
possible, make changes within their own spheres of influence reflect
current scholarship in the field. These are what Olson would call
"local, partial, and dynamic changes" necessary to make the "standards
permeable to meet diverse information needs" (Olson 661). Adler notes
that "the way we decide to classify something says a lot about how we
want to remember it, but a closer examination also says a great deal
about what we're willing to forget or disavow" (Adler 553). To their
credit, the librarians who brought about the addition of asexuality to
LCSH and who removed the "Illegal aliens" subject heading from their
local catalogs showed that they were not willing to disavow the humanity
of those who do not benefit from "the discourses that privilege certain
norms" (Adler and Harper 57). In fact, they engaged the ethical
responsibility they bear thanks to the power they control to organize
information (Adler and Harper 58).

Addressing harmful language in library catalogs must take place
collaboratively with the communities libraries serve. To that end, UW
Libraries have laid out a clear process that is respectful of patron
privacy by which patrons can report offensive or harmful language they
encounter in the catalog (Casey et al.). Metadata specialists are
responsible for mountains of data and are hampered by budget restraints
and limited time in the day. In the face of these obstacles, patron
participation in the remediation of harmful language in the catalog is a
welcome and necessary solution.

While criticism of LCSH dates back decades, it will always be a timely
issue. Language is always changing, so metadata specialists will always
need to respond to such change by striving to ensure that resource
descriptions are up-to-date and devoid of, as far as is possible,
harmful terminology. As Olson says, the "'better and quicker and
cheaper'" of standardized metadata "is always at a price, and the price
is the violent reshaping of objects to fit the preconceptions of the
knowing subject" (663). One hopes that the field now recognizes and is
willing to constantly reexamine the diversity of knowing subjects and is
"getting out of the way enough for communities to determine how they
want to best document themselves" (Matienzo 2015). The movement by
librarians in institutional settings like academic and public libraries
is a promising, though admittedly imperfect, start. Without this work,
work that must always be returned to, libraries run the risk of further
dehumanizing their patrons and obviating the reason for their existence
in the first place.

Works Cited

@harvlong\. "Her name was Annette Phinazee. By all accounts, she was the
GOAT. Her 1961

> Columbia University dissertation was a critical examination of the LoC
> and its cataloging practices." _Twitter,_ 30 Sept. 2021, 1:04 p.m.,
> https://twitter.com/harvlong/status/1443637915519754243.

\@violetbfox. "Reminder that #critcat/radical cataloging history
doesn\'t begin & end with

> Berman. See also Frances Yocom who wrote about the lack of subject
> headings for materials about African-Americans in 1940." _Twitter,_ 1
> Oct. 2021, 2:09 a.m.,
> https://twitter.com/violetbfox/status/1443835511777472528.

Adler, Melissa. \"Afterword: The Strangeness of Subject Cataloging.\"
_Library Trends_, vol. 68,

> no. 3, 2020, pp. 549-556. _Project MUSE_,
> http://doi.org/10.1353/lib.2020.0005.

Adler, Melissa and Lindsey M. Harper. "Race and Ethnicity in
Classification Systems: Teaching

> Knowledge Organization from a Social Justice Perspective." _Library
> Trends_, vol. 67, no. 1, 2018, pp. 52-73. _Project MUSE,_ > https://doi.org/10.1353/lib.2018.0025.

Casey, Conor M., Erin Grant, Keiko Hill, Kat Lewis, Crystal Rodgers.
"Words Matter: Critical

> Cataloging and Archival Description at the University of Washington
> Libraries." _UW Libraries Blog_,
> <https://sites.uw.edu/libstrat/2021/09/07/words-matter-critical-cataloging-and-archival-description-at-the-university-of-washington-libraries/>.
> Accessed 6 October 2021.

"Core Values of Librarianship." _American Library Association_, 26 July
2006,

> <https://www.ala.org/advocacy/intfreedom/corevalues>. Accessed 6
> October 2021.

Ford, Anne. "Conscientious Cataloging." _American Libraries,_ 1 Sept.
2020,

> <https://americanlibrariesmagazine.org/2020/09/01/conscientious-cataloging/>.
> Accessed 6 October 2021.

"Library of Congress to Cancel the Subject Heading 'Illegal Aliens.'"
_Library of Congress_, 22

> March 2016,
> <https://www.loc.gov/catdir/cpso/illegal-aliens-decision.pdf>.
> Accessed 6 October 2021.

Matienzo, Mark A. \"To Hell With Good Intentions: Linked Data,
Community, and the Power to

> Name.\" _matienzo.org_, 14 Nov. 2015,
> <https://matienzo.org/2016/to-hell-with-good-intentions/>. Accessed 6
> October 2021.

Nunes, Zita Cristina. "Remembering the Howard University Librarian Who
Decolonized the

> Way Books Were Catalogued." _Smithsonian Magazine_, 26 Nov. 2018,
> <https://www.smithsonianmag.com/history/remembering-howard-university-librarian-who-decolonized-way-books-were-catalogued-180970890/>.
> Accessed 6 Oct. 2021.

Olson, Hope A. "The Power to Name: Representation in Library Catalogs."
*Sign*s, vol. 26, no. 3,

> 2001, pp. 639-668.

Watson, Brian M. "'There was Sex but no Sexuality\*:' Critical
Cataloging and the Classification

> of Asexuality in LCSH." _Cataloging & Classification Quarterly_, vol.
> 58, no. 6, 2020, pp. 547-565.
