---
title: "LS 501: Final Essays"
---

William Blackerby

LS 501-925

Dr. Jeff Weddle

December 5, 2021

# Final Essay Exam

## Two Essential ALA Core Values

The two ALA core values that are most critical for the profession right
now are Access and the Public Good. The amount of information available
to our communities continues to grow and contribute to increasing both
information overload and misinformation. Reputable information is often
difficult to find or inaccessible due to paywalls, discoverability
challenges, institutional and socio-cultural biases, and other
impediments. These two complementary core values offer an antidote to
this situation, and librarians have an essential role to play in helping
their communities both find the information they need and make sense of
it.

It is easy to feel an acute sense of the loss of a shared understanding
of the public good these days. A screenshot of an old tweet by the user
\@\_Amanda_Killian, whose account is no longer findable, has been
circulating online recently and expresses this sentiment with these
words: "Libraries literally aren't just a place to obtain books for
free. They're one of the few public spaces left in our society where
you're allowed to exist without the expectation of spending money"
(@AletheaKontis). Along the same lines, Shannon Mattern makes the case
that libraries are essential social infrastructure (a public good),
saying "Most people who use the \[library\] building are not going there
just to read a book or watch a film; many of them probably do not have
any definite purpose at all. They go just to be part of the community in
the building" (Mattern). This recalls Jürgen Habermas's notion of the
public sphere, which Tufekçi interprets "as the location and place in
which rational arguments about matters concerning the public, especially
regarding issues of governance and the civics can take place, freed from
constraints of status and identity" (Tufekçi). Alstad and Curry state
that "As a physical place, the public library exemplifies the public
sphere" (11). Too much in our society is an individual's worth connected
to the value they contribute to the economy, which determines their
status and identity. By holding up the Public Good as a core value,
librarians push back against this tide and play an essential societal
role reminding people that their value is not determined by their net
worth, family, or job and that their voices matter in the public sphere.

There are many ways of looking at the core value of Access, but the most
important way right now is to continually critically examine the
language we use to make the items in our collections accessible. This
has long been an area of interest and discussion in LIS, but Olson's
work makes it strikingly clear that our systems for organizing and
naming our resources have a profound influence on "access to information
outside of the cultural mainstream and about groups marginalized in our
society" (640). In other words, access to information about topics
outside of the cultural mainstream or about marginalized members of
society often requires the use of harmful language. If libraries and
librarians are to uphold their value that library resources "should be
readily, equally, and equitably accessible to all library users," they
must understand that responsible librarianship demands that its
practitioners constantly seek ways to improve this situation ("Core
Values of Librarianship."). It is essential to making the public sphere
a welcoming place for all.

## Libraries and Neutrality

As a straight, white, cisgender male, privately educated from my
pre-kindergarten days through my undergraduate degree, it has always
been the norm for me to view neutrality as the safe, comfortable
default. This is because I am a member of dominant groups, and as
Dempsey states, "to be 'neutral' can actually mean to be aligned with
dominant perspectives" (Dempsey). Neutrality can also connote
harmlessness, and I believe harmlessness is an implicitly stated ideal
for libraries and librarians. That is, librarians and library
institutions do not wish to harm their patrons. They exist, after all,
to help. However, assuming a so-called neutral or objective position can
inadvertently harm library patrons who are not members of dominant
groups. Libraries and librarians, even when they choose neutrality, are
not neutral.

Adler and Harper state that "The very possibility of the idea of library
neutrality exists because of the belief in the objectivity of library
science. The cost of such framing is not only an erasure of discordant
voices, but perhaps more important, a depoliticization of the library
space" (57). When libraries choose neutrality, they non-neutrally erase
discordant voices who, in some cases, are people who do not belong to
dominant groups or hold dominant perspectives. Gibson, et al., more
damningly frame "neutrality as a practice in structural oppression of
marginalized groups, as it is characterized by disengagement from (as
opposed to active engagement with) crises within communities of color"
and go on to say that "choosing neutrality (or disengagement) in time of
conflict is choosing to maintain status quo at the expense of one
portion of a community" (754). Neutrality implies the absence of
antagonism and conflict, but Seale, strikingly, says that "antagonism
and conflict are what make democracy possible; a lack of dissent
signifies the imposition of authoritarian order" (590). By this
assessment, if librarians are to take seriously their core value of
Democracy, they must reject neutrality outright.

That said, I do not take a rejection of neutrality to require that
libraries and librarians take a position on the issue du jour or engage
in partisanship. Rather, I borrow an operative word from Gibson et al.'s
analysis: disengagement. If neutrality is disengagement, then a
rejection of neutrality is engagement. Engagement does not immediately
imply the taking of a position. Instead, it asserts an expectation that
engaged librarians will inform themselves and thus work to assist their
patrons to inform themselves as well. This engagement, especially among
librarians, as self-informing and continual reflection will necessarily
lead to making the library a more equitable space. Rejection of
neutrality does not entail a rejection of harmlessness, which may be
better termed as safety. In fact, rejecting neutrality and embracing
engagement demonstrate an endorsement of psychological, existential
safety for all patrons, especially those who are members of marginalized
groups.

Libraries and librarians are either actively not neutral or passively
not neutral. Since libraries cannot be neutral, it is the responsibility
of libraries and librarians to take the active route if they wish to
uphold their professional values and serve their patrons to the best of
their ability.

## Information Services and Diverse Communities in a Global Society

Without communities, there are no libraries. As Lankes says, "All
libraries, whether public or private, large or small, should be about
communities, those they serve and are part of---that's just
librarianship" (7). The same author goes on to say that "A community ...
is not limited to a community of citizens in a given geographical
location" before enumerating examples of communities such as schools,
universities, law firms, and professional groups (Lankes, 8-9). These
are examples of what I will call micro-communities, but in our
hyperconnected, always online world, librarians need to consider their
membership in the macro-community that is global society if they are to
fulfill what Lankes calls their mission: "to improve society through
facilitating knowledge creation in their communities" (17).

One aspect of information services librarians must consider in a global
society is mobility. Libraries and librarians certainly have a
responsibility to serve their immediate community, be that the
geographic area that their public library serves or the university
community of which their academic library is a part. But they must also
serve transient members of their communities. As Lehman states, "a
library can communicate and engage with _visitors_ \[emphasis mine\] and
city citizens in real time" (417). In other words, when considering how
best to serve their communities, librarians should be aware that patrons
who walk through their doors of their institution may not be permanent
members of their communities, but they still have a responsibility to
ensure that their access to the library's resources is fair and
equitable. This may mean being prepared to cross a language barrier or
to alleviate unfamiliarity with the community in which their patrons
find themselves.

More pressing, though, is confronting the responsibility librarians have
to ensure access to the resources they steward to those whose access may
be impeded by economic status, institutional or governmental policy, and
other social determinants. This is especially important in the world of
scholarly communication and academic libraries. Vast amounts of
knowledge are created at research institutions, but those who might
benefit from that knowledge may not know of its existence or, since that
knowledge is often published in journals requiring expensive
subscriptions to access it, may not have the means to access it due to
the wrong institutional affiliation (or lack thereof). Wenzler views
institutional cooperation as essential to his concept of the "collective
collection" but notes that collaborating across institutional boundaries
is challenging (184). Academic institutions may be competitors vying for
scarce resources, so "bonds of reciprocal trust that allow groups to
achieve collective ends" are harder to create (185).

Open Access (OA) publishing can be seen as both a way to navigate these
challenges and solution that has muddied the waters. I will not discuss
the practical aspects of implementing OA here, but I believe that it is
based on important ideals, especially since it puts the needs of
information seekers ahead of institutions. This fact seems to trouble
Holley, who says "If the goal of 'completely free and unrestricted
access' were to be achieved, this open access would remove one of the
main reasons why academic libraries exist---to provide information
resources to faculty and students that they could otherwise not afford"
(236). Lankes's dictum that "As ... communities ... change, so, too,
must librarianship" is a helpful response here. Librarians do not exist
to prolong the lives of the institutions that employ them. They exist to
serve their patrons, regardless of who they are or where they come from.

## Reflection

Entering this program, I assumed that I would be spending most of my
time on the technical ins-and-outs of librarianship, learning
cataloging, classification, and other essential elements of knowledge
organization. I thought that's what librarianship was. I am, however, so
grateful that this class exposed me to the breadth of librarianship and
focused especially on the human aspects of it. This class drives home
the fact that librarianship is a service profession, and that those who
enter it are responsible for holding themselves, their colleagues, their
institutions, and their professional organizations to a high standard.

At first, I was skeptical that the debate surrounding whether librarians
are professionals mattered; let's just do our jobs! Now, after
experiencing the thorough examination of the ALA core values this class
offers, I am convinced that professionalism is essential to the practice
of good librarianship.

Some of the most challenging material in the course had to do with
equity and library neutrality and objectivity. For example, when reading
April Hathcock's blog post about scholarly communication, I found myself
reacting somewhat negatively to some of her arguments, particularly
about how "\[w\]e've taken our diseased local system of scholarly
communication and made it global" (Hathcock). I asked questions in my
notes like "how is it diseased?" and "concretely, what have the west and
north done wrong?" It's not that I disagree with Hathcock. Rather, I was
looking for more evidence to support her claims, and I realized that it
is my responsibility to get myself up to speed on the topic and do the
work necessary find that evidence.

Similarly, entering the program I conceived of libraries as safe,
conflict-free, and neutral. In fact, that conception is part of what
drew me to this program. I am delighted to have been relieved of that
conception through this class. Certainly, as I stated in my earlier
essay on libraries and neutrality, libraries are safe and neutral to me
_because_ I am a white man of some privilege and power. But the course
material opened my eyes to the perspectives of those who are members of
marginalized groups. Going forward, I feel certain that I will challenge
myself and my colleagues to think critically whenever we conceive of
"the public" as some monolithic group.

Along those lines, I think the main concepts I will carry forward with
me as I finish my degree and begin my career have to do with critical
cataloging. I am drawn to knowledge organization, cataloging, and
classification because I am interested in how language is used to
navigate the catalog and access resources available in collections. More
than anything else from this course, I am grateful to be relieved of the
notion that controlled vocabularies are objective. The Olson reading was
eye-opening, and I feel certain that I will return to it. I pulled so
many quotations from it, but I think the most important one for me to
remember will be "The controlled vocabulary dictated by Cutter is, then,
representation in the terms of the majority" (642). I hope to always
remind myself that as an information professional, my responsibility is
not just to the majority, it is to everyone.

I am grateful for the challenge this course offered and I know that I
will return to its material again and again during my degree and career.

**Works Cited**

**Two Essential ALA Core Values**

\@AletheaKontis. "YES, THIS!!! Support your local library." _Twitter_,
27 Nov. 2021, 8:00 a.m.,

> twitter.com/AletheaKontis/status/1464595100688957444.

Alstad, Colleen and Ann Curry. (2014), "Public space, public discourse,
and public libraries."

> _Library and Information Science Research eJournal_, vol. 13. no.1, 2014.
> <https://www.libres-ejournal.info/wp-content/uploads/2014/06/Vol13_I1_pub_space.pdf>.
> Accessed 5 Dec. 2021.

"Core Values of Librarianship." _American Library Association_, 26 July
2006,

> <https://www.ala.org/advocacy/intfreedom/corevalues>. Accessed 5 Dec. 2021.

Mattern, Shannon. "Library as Infrastructure." _Places Journal_, June 2014.

> <https://doi.org/10.22269/140609>. Accessed 5 Dec. 2021.

Olson, Hope A. "The Power to Name: Representation in Library Catalogs."
*Sign*s, vol. 26, no. 3,

> 2001, pp. 639-668.

Tufekci, Zeynep. "Engineering the public: Big data, surveillance and
computational politics."

> _First Monday_, vol. 19, no. 7, 2014.
> <https://firstmonday.org/ojs/index.php/fm/article/download/4901/4097>.
> Accessed 5 Dec. 2021.

**Libraries and Neutrality**

Adler, Melissa and Lindsey M. Harper. "Race and Ethnicity in
Classification Systems: Teaching

> Knowledge Organization from a Social Justice Perspective." _Library
> Trends_, vol. 67, no. 1, 2018, pp. 52-73. _Project MUSE,_ > <https://doi.org/10.1353/lib.2018.0025>.

Dempsey, Lorcan. "Two Metadata Directions." _LorcanDempsey.net_. 21 July 2021.

> <https://www.lorcandempsey.net/metadata-directions/>. Accessed 5 Dec. 2021.

Gibson, A. N., Chancellor, R. L., Cooke, N. A., Park Dahlen, S., Lee, S.
A., & Shorish, Y. L.

> "Libraries on the frontlines: neutrality and social justice."
> _Equality, Diversity and Inclusion: An International Journal_, vol.
> 36, no. 8, 2014, pp. 751--766.
> <https://doi.org/10.1108/EDI-11-2016-0100>

Seale, Maura. "Compliant Trust: The Public Good and Democracy in the
ALA's 'Core Values of

> Librarianship.'" _Library Trends_, vol. 64, no. 3, 2016, pp. 585--603.
> _Project Muse,_ <https://muse.jhu.edu/article/613925>.

**Information Services and Diverse Communities in a Global Society**

Holley, Robert P. "Open Access: Current Overview and Future Prospects."
_Library Trends_, vol.

> 67, no. 2, 2018, pp. 214-240.

Lankes, R. David. _The New Librarianship Field Guide_. Cambridge, MA,
The MIT Press, 2016.

Lehman, Maria Lorena. "Future-proofing the public library." _Public
Library Quarterly_, vol. 37,

> no. 4, 2018, pp. 408-419.
> <https://doi.org/10.1080/01616846.2018.1513256>.

Wenzler, John. "Scholarly Communication and the Dilemma of Collective
Action: Why

> Academic Journals Cost Too Much." _College and Research Libraries_,
> vol. 78, no. 2, 2017, pp. 183-200.

**Reflection**

Hathcock, April. "Making the Local Global: The Colonialism of Scholarly
Communication." _At_

> _The Intersection_, 27 Sept. 2016.
> <https://aprilhathcock.wordpress.com/2016/09/27/making-the-local-global-the-colonialism-of-scholarly-communication>.
> Accessed 2 Nov. 2021.

Olson, Hope A. "The Power to Name: Representation in Library Catalogs."
*Sign*s, vol. 26, no. 3,

> 2001, pp. 639-668.
