---
title: "LS 501: Scholarly Communication Reading Response"
bookToc: false
---

William Blackerby

LS 501-925

Dr. Jeff Weddle

November 2, 2021

Scholarly Communication Reading Response

Prior to my engagement with the assigned readings on scholarly
communication, besides knowing that peer review is important in the
process, I had little idea of how scholarly journals are published. In
fact, I was somewhat skeptical of why something that seemed as narrowly
focused as academic publishing needed a week's worth of our attention in
this class. Thanks to these readings, though, that skepticism is gone.
While I don't have a firm or expert grasp on the economics and mechanics
of scholarly publishing, I know enough now to realize that there are
winners and losers in this game and the situation could (and should) be
a lot better.

Before the Internet became the dominant system for the creation,
storage, and spread of information, scholarly activity was shared in
print journals stored and stewarded in academic libraries (Wenzler 183).
These libraries owned the copies of the journals on their shelves and
interested readers could access the information contained in them by
physically entering the library. Today, with the Internet, the access
picture has changed. Digital networks are, of course, a "more efficient
method of sharing scholarly ideas," but it's also more efficient, and
cost-effective, for publishers to "organize, store, and track scholarly
publications" on their own digital infrastructure, removing these
responsibilities from libraries in the process (Wenzler 183, 187).
Nowadays, association with an institution\'s library grants interested
readers the credentials necessary to access journal articles not by
going to the library but by logging into subscription services purchased
and managed by the library to read articles stored on servers controlled
by the companies that publish them.

The Holley, Katz, and Wenzler readings make clear that a variety of
labor goes into the production of scholarly communication, and this
labor, of course, has associated costs. With publishers controlling
nearly every aspect of this publication process, costs have grown
exorbitantly. Most journal publishers are for-profit companies, and as
such, their purpose, whatever the "About" page on their website may say,
is to increase their profits. Wenzler tells us that "Journal prices
continue to rise faster than the rate of inflation and absorb an
increasing percentage of academic library budgets" (184). Because of
this, "less of the library's resources are going to staff, space, or
other initiatives because more of its funding is going directly to the
publishers" (Wenzler 188). Could Open Access (OA) be a solution to these
costs? How hard could Open Access be to understand? Isn't the idea that
anyone can access any scholarly information they want in any quantity?
What could go wrong with such an equitable, democratic vision for
knowledge creation, publication, and dissemination? As it turns out, the
answers to these questions are complex and involve a range of
institutions, stakeholders, motivations, and power structures,
especially when agreeing on just what Open Access means.

In addition to publishers, the major institutional players involved in
scholarly communication are universities and libraries, specifically,
academic libraries governed by universities. Universities employ the
researchers whose scholarship fills the pages of the journals produced
by the publishers. Libraries, and by extension the universities they
belong to, are the publishers' customers, that is, the ones spending
larger and larger portions of their budgets on the publishers'
subscriptions services. Universities don't create scholarship and
libraries don't consume it; people do. On the knowledge creation side of
this arrangement, in addition to the researchers whose work is published
in journals, universities also employ the scholars who serve on the
editorial boards of the journals and the scholars who review the
researchers' work (Doctorow). On the knowledge consumption side, library
staff negotiate with publishers on prices for their subscription
services so that they can create access to scholarship for their
patrons. In terms of motivations, the production of research benefits
universities by raising their profiles, thus augmenting key revenue
streams (tuition, donations, and grants). Researchers are expected to
publish in prestigious journals to advance their careers (Doctorow);
Holley states that "formal peer review is an assumed requirement for
tenure and promotion" and even holds universities responsible "for much
of the scholarly communication crisis that led to open access because of
the increasing demands upon faculty members for research publications"
(220). So, not only are researchers beholden to journal publishers for
the advancement of their careers, but they also often lose out even more
"because most academic authors usually transfer copyright" to the
publishers (Wenzler 187). What's more, if these same authors publish in
a Gold Open Access journal, they may need to pay an article processing
charge since such journals are available without subscriptions (Wenzler
190, 217). As Jill Grogg, a Licensing Program Strategist with LYRASIS,
said in her October 20 guest lecture on scholarly communication, "the
open environment is not free."

Any consideration of access must also consider control. What can an
individual librarian, or a small institution, control when it comes to
access to scholarly information? The pessimistic answer is not much.
Nevertheless, though an individual or a single institution cannot change
such a convoluted system alone, they can perhaps make choices on a
smaller scale that meet the information needs of their own community
while advocating with others for change by those in positions of power
(those with control, specifically, the publishers). This, as both
Wenzler and Holley show, is much easier said than done, especially when
it's not clear what the definition of success or improvement looks like.

After presenting the Budapest Open Access Initiative definition, Holley
uses Suber's definition of Open Access while noting Anderson's comments
on the implications of the definitional uncertainty surrounding the term
(Holley 216). From Wenzler's perspective, "the fundamental hurdle that
prevents academic libraries from enjoying the full economic benefits
enabled by digital technology is the challenge of collaborating across
traditional institutional boundaries" (184). In other words, to beat the
publishers at their own game, universities, who are often competitors
for revenue, must cooperate. But because getting institutions to
cooperate is so challenging, the present Open Access landscape is
fragmented and "the power structures and elites of the publishing world
have monetized an initiative that was intended to make information
freely available and to reduce their power" (Holley 224).

Of course, libraries' budgetary bottom lines are not the only aspect of
Open Access that merits consideration. The point of all of this
according to Cirasella is "not OA in and of itself but rather the
opportunities OA presents for individuals, universities, fields of
study, and global publics" (qtd. in Holley 234). As Holley says, "if the
goal of open access is to provide more research for faculty and
students, both green and gold \[Open Access journals\] have achieved
some success" (235). Perhaps it is utopian or naïve, but I rather admire
the Budapest Open Access Initiative definition:

> By "open access" to this literature, we mean its free availability on
> the public internet, permitting any users to read, download, copy,
> distribute, print, search, or link to the full texts of these
> articles, crawl them for indexing, pass them as data to software, or
> use them for any other lawful purpose, without financial, legal, or
> technical barriers other than those inseparable from gaining access to
> the internet itself. The only constraint on reproduction and
> distribution, and the only role for copyright in this domain, should
> be to give authors control over the integrity of their work and the
> right to be properly acknowledged and cited. (qtd. in Holley 216).

Holley, on the other hand does not, saying

> If the goal of "completely free and unrestricted access" were to be
> achieved, this open access would remove one of the main reasons why
> academic libraries exist---to provide information resources to faculty
> and students that they could otherwise not afford. While faculty and
> students might still need help in navigating the new structures, this
> free availability would lessen their dependence on the digital library
> in the same way that digital resources have reduced the need to come
> to the physical library. (236)

I certainly hope Holley does not think that the purpose of libraries is
to get people to come to the library. I can't imagine a world in which
information seekers don't need the assistance of information
professionals for help navigating available resources, no matter the
form they take or the means of publication. Libraries are about getting
information to those who need it, not getting people in the door or on
the website.

I save my discussion of Hathcock for last because in some ways it seems
the most important of the readings for this topic and is the one I
struggled with the most. Hathcock's blog post was a helpful reminder of
the human side of all of this, far more so than anything we read that
was published in a scholarly journal. It challenged me and left me with
questions that I almost feel silly asking and that point to my need to
educate myself about colonialism and neoliberalism. In my reading notes
on the piece, I ask "concretely, what have the west and the north done
wrong?" The high school history answers to this are self-evident, but I
admit I have work to do when it comes to learning how to answer these
questions for myself through the lens of scholarly communication and
knowledge creation in the present day. As soon as I found myself wishing
for more on these topics in Hathcock's piece, I realized her admonition
to "Look it up!" and the blog post it linked to were speaking directly
to me.

That I have barely scratched the surface in discussing the complexity of
scholarly communication in the present day not only reflects my surface
level understanding of it, but also the fact that the situation is vast,
ever-changing, and requires a certain level of comfort with economics.
But the basic facts are easy to understand: the publishers run the show
and researchers and information professionals want the situation to be
better, but because cooperation across institutional boundaries is hard,
Open Access solutions are fragmented and sometimes coopted by the
publishers. Unlike at least one of the authors we read, I am new enough
to this to still hold out hope that genuinely open and inclusive
scholarly communication can become a reality.

Works Cited

Doctorow, Cory. "All of science gets a general index." _Pluralistic:
Daily links from Cory_

> _Doctorow_, 28 Oct. 2021.
> <https://pluralistic.net/2021/10/28/clintons-ghost/#cornucopia-concordance>.
> Accessed 2 Nov. 2021.

Grogg, Jill. "Scholarly Communication." LS 501, University of Alabama.
Received 20 Oct.

> 2021\. Course Guest Lecture.

Hathcock, April. "Look It Up \*Wavy Hand Emoji\*." _At The
Intersection_, 18 Aug. 2016.

> <https://aprilhathcock.wordpress.com/2016/08/18/look-it-up-wavy-hand-emoji>.
> Accessed 2 Nov. 2021.

Hathcock, April. "Making the Local Global: The Colonialism of Scholarly
Communication." _At_

> _The Intersection_, 27 Sept. 2016.
> <https://aprilhathcock.wordpress.com/2016/09/27/making-the-local-global-the-colonialism-of-scholarly-communication>.
> Accessed 2 Nov. 2021.

Holley, Robert P. "Open Access: Current Overview and Future Prospects."
_Library Trends_, vol.

> 67, no. 2, 2018, pp. 214-240.

Wenzler, John. "Scholarly Communication and the Dilemma of Collective
Action: Why

> Academic Journals Cost Too Much." _College and Research Libraries_,
> vol. 78, no. 2, 2017, pp. 183-200.
