---
title: "LS 535: Case Study Memorandum"
---

+-----------------------------------------------------------------------+
| # Indian Springs School |
+=======================================================================+
+-----------------------------------------------------------------------+

: First table has company name and second table has memo information

---

To: Tanya Yeager, Assistant Head of School for Finance and
Administration

---

From: William Blackerby, Records Management Consultant

CC: Scott Schamberger, Head of School

Date: August 2, 2022

Re: Implementing a Records Retention Plan

---

: First table has company name and second table has memo information

[As the National Association of Independent Schools Legal Advisory
titled "Records Retention: What, How Long, and
How?"](https://www.nais.org/media/MemberDocuments/Legal/NAIS_Legal_Advisory_Records_Retention_2018-7-3-2018.pdf),
which was last updated in June of 2018, states, "\[s\]chools are record
intensive places" (p. 21). Indian Springs School is no exception. The
school handles academic records, health records, athletic records,
employment records, board meeting minutes, donation records, and the
list goes on. Unfortunately, while individual departments may or may not
have ad hoc plans for managing their own records, there is no
comprehensive plan for the management and retention of these records.
This memorandum calls for the creation and implementation of an
integrated, overarching records management and retention system for
Indian Springs School based on the NAIS legal advisory.

**The Why of Records Retention**

Debra P. Wilson and Whitney Silverman, the authors of the aforementioned
whitepaper, state that "Proper document retention is necessary in the
event of a lawsuit, helps a school capture intellectual property in
terms of courses and curriculum, and makes it easy for a school to know
with reasonable certainty that it has all the documents it needs for any
purpose" (p. 1). In other words, records retention helps an institution
know what it knows. Besides the regulatory aspects of records retention,
schools "should also be driven by business purpose and usefulness" (p.
2). Sound records retention makes informational queries easier to
respond to. Of particular import for our context is the ability to
respond to internal informational queries.

**Electronic Records**

Indian Springs School juggles multiple platforms for electronic records
management. The main tool used across all departments is Google
Workspace. Because of the generous storage capabilities provided by this
platform, it easy, as Wilson and Silverman say, "to store vast amounts
of information -- which also makes it harder \[to manage records\] since
there can be so many more records to sort through" (p. 2). This is
evidenced by the vast numbers of unorganized digital files shared across
Indian Springs School's Google Workspace. Generally speaking, these
files lack a taxonomic structure shared across the school, so locating a
desired record requires using the tool's search function to craft an
effective query, which can be a trial-and-error process.

**Federal Record Retention Requirements**

An essential element of records retention is being prepared for legal
action. The following is a summary of federal actions that schools
should be prepared for drawn from the Wilson and Silverman whitepaper
(pp. 4-7).

- American with Disabilities Act (ADA)

  - Employment Records: One Year

  - Employment Discrimination Filing: Until Matter is Resolved

  - Public Accommodations Records: No Set Time

- Fair Labor Standards Act (FLSA)

  - Payroll: At least three years

  - Records for Wage Computations: Two Years

- Family Medical Leave Act (FMLA)

  - Records related to FMLA Leave: Three Years

- I-9 Forms

  - Forms: Three Years after Hiring of One Year after End of
    Relationship, Whichever is Later

- Employment Retirement Income Security Act (ERISA)

  - Varies depending on specific benefits offered

- Tax

  - Employment Tax Records: Four Years

The ADA merits additional note. According to Wilson and Silverman, two
sections are relevant to independent schools like ours: "Title deals
with employment matters and Title III applies to students and other
matters of public accommodation" (p. 4). As the number students with
accommodations we enroll increases, we must ensure that we are in
compliance with Title III of the ADA.

**State Record Retention Requirements**

In addition to federal law, the school is subject to state records
management laws as well. The relationship between federal and state
requirements is as follows: "states cannot lessen a federal requirement,
but they may extend it. Also, states may have regulations where the
federal government has none" (Wilson and Silverman, p. 7).

These records can be broken down into permanent and temporary records.
Examples of permanent records in schools are "basic identifying
information, academic transcripts, and attendance records" (p. 8). A
decision for the school to make would be whether or not to include
"long-term suspensions, expulsions, and health records" in permanent
records (p. 8). The school's legal counsel should be consulted on this
matter.

Temporary records may need to be kept for three to six years; such
records may include family background information, extracurricular
records, teacher notes, disciplinary information, psychological
information, and health information (p. 8). Legal counsel should also be
consulted on this matter to ensure the school is keeping the appropriate
records.

Finally, counsel should also be consulted about state requirements for
immunization records.

**Statutes of Limitations**

This memorandum does not address statutes of limitations in depth or
detail, but such statutes should be taken into consideration during the
process of creating the records retention system, under guidance of
school counsel as usual. Counsel should especially be consulted about
records related to sexual abuse claims.

**Document Destruction**

As part of the process of developing a records retention system, "a
point person who is aware of all document destruction should be"
identified (p. 10). The decision should also be made about whether
document destruction will be conducted in-house or by an outside vendor.
Additionally, the length of time electronic records are retained should
be decided on as well.

**A Records Retention System Development Plan for Indian Springs
School**

This section of the memorandum draws from and elaborates on the
guidelines established in the NAIS whitepaper on how to create a records
retention system (pp. 12-14).

- The Document Team

  - Comprised of IT director, Assistant Head of School for Finance
    and Administration, Assistant Head of School for Academics,
    Assistant Head of School for External Affairs, Dean of Faculty,
    Dean of Students, School Nurse, School Counselor, Athletic
    Director, Director of College Advising, Director of Enrollment
    Management, School Archivist

  - Responsible for developing the overall records retention plan
    for the school

- School Counsel

  - The Assistant Head of School for Finance and Administration will
    contact the school's attorney to request a brief on:

    - Statues of limitations in Alabama for records in the
      school's care

    - Student records requirements for the State of Alabama

    - Advice on crafting a document retention plan

- Auditor

  - The Assistant Head of School for Finance and Administration will
    contact the school's auditing firm, Dent Moses, to solicit input
    on document retention with an eye towards making the annual
    audit a smoother process.

- Goals

  - The goals of this plan are to

    - Migrate as many records as possible to an internal
      electronic database

    - Destroy records that are no longer necessary, with input
      from the School Archivist

    - Create and implement an effective records retention
      schedule.

- Documents

  - Each member of the Document Team should come to the initial
    meeting with a comprehensive list of the documents each
    department they represent create, specifying whether they are
    print or electronic and how long they are currently kept. This
    will serve as a sort of "rough draft" of the final retention
    schedule.

- Point Person

  - The School Archivist will be the point person for records
    management. The School Archivist will report to the Assistant
    Head of School for Finance and Operations through the school's
    business office.

- Training

  - This is the key element of the whole plan. The Document Team
    will need to develop a plan to train staff. For example:

    - Teachers

      - Should be trained on how long to keep communications
        with students and parents/guardians

    - Supervisors (department chairs, deans, directors)

      - Should be trained on how long to keep emails, memoranda,
        and other communications sent to their direct reports

    - Administrative Staff (receptionist, communications staff)

      - Should be trained on where and how to store official
        school communications, e.g., emergency messages, letters
        from the Head of School's office and various deans'
        offices.

- Review of Retention Schedule

  - The Document Team should review the retention schedule every
    three years.

**Sample Retention Schedule**

Below is a sample Records Retention Schedule drawn from the NAIS legal
advisory (p. 16). This should be distributed to the Document Team to
help them visualize what the final Indian Springs School specific
retention schedule might look like and to give members of the Document
Team a starting point for the listing the types of documents they are
responsible for.

![Table Description automatically
generated](media/image1.png){width="6.5in" height="7.659722222222222in"}

In addition to consulting with school counsel and the school's auditor,
the school should take advantage of the [records management policy
shared by the Ravenscroft
School](https://www.nais.org/getmedia/1df55f2d-3a7e-4755-b18b-5ac6c48880de/Ravenscroft_Document-Retention-Policy06.pdf)
and outlined below.

**Outline of Ravenscroft School Document Retention Policy, to be used as
a model**

I. Objectives

    a.  This section establishes the goals of the policy.

II. Policy

    a.  This section enumerates the general records retention policy.

III. Responsibility

     a.  This section establishes the responsibility each school
         employee has to steward the documents in their care.

IV. Definitions

    a.  This section defines records management related terms and roles
        that will be used throughout the document.

V. Administration

    a.  This section lists the individuals responsible for records
        management and specifies their roles.

VI. Implementation

    a.  This section enumerates in detail the operational procedures for
        executing the Document Retention Policy

VII. Amendment Procedure

     a.  This section explains the proper procedure for amending the
         Document Retention Policy and the Records Retention Schedule.

**Conclusion**

This memorandum has served as a summary of the NAIS legal advisory on
records management in independent schools as well as an outline of how
its recommendations can be applied to Indian Springs School.

My recommendation is that the school form the Document Team in August of
this year with a goal of finalizing a schoolwide records retention
policy, including a records retention schedule, by December 31.

Though engaging in such a project will no doubt be time and labor
intensive for school leaders, it should lead to improvements in
efficiency across the school.
