---
title: "LS 566: Metadata Quality Problems"
bookToc: false
---

William Blackerby

Dr. Steven MacCall

LS 566

25 September 2021

Assignment #2: Metadata quality problems

In their article "Achieving and Maintaining Metadata Quality: Toward a
Sustainable Workflow for the IDEALS Institutional Repository," Stein,
Applegate, and Robbins give a useful overview of the kinds of metadata
quality problems that can occur in collections before detailing how they
developed a workflow to address metadata problems in the institutional
repository they manage. Here I will summarize the kinds of problems they
discuss.

The authors begin by noting that there is no universally accepted
definition of quality metadata before sharing Park's proposed definition
(645). Following Park, we can determine if we have quality metadata by
asking if it performs "the core bibliographic functions of discovery,
use, provenance, currency, authenticity, and administration," or more
generally, asking if the metadata is complete, accurate, and consistent
(645). Yasser's "five universal metadata problems" of "Incorrect Values,
Incorrect Elements, Missing Information, Information Loss, and
Inconsistent Value Representation" are perhaps even more useful for
understanding metadata quality problems thanks to their concreteness
(645-646).

Multiple sources and entry points for metadata into a system can lead to
incompleteness, inaccuracy, and inconsistency. Both humans and machines
can introduce these kinds of problems, and problems multiply when
metadata in legacy formats like MARC are reused and when there is
exchange between systems (647). Metadata from sources that use different
controlled vocabularies can lead to inconsistencies, as can the lack of
a name authority file (647). There may be syntactic inconsistencies in
metadata (e.g., differences in capitalization, abbreviation) as well
semantic differences like the conflation of contributors and authors
(659).

In addition to these technical issues, administrative challenges can
also contribute to metadata quality problems. Staffing and funding are
required for the creation and maintenance of quality metadata, but
budget restraints can impede having adequate numbers of workers with the
right tools and training to assure metadata quality (647). The authors
also note that IT staff and librarians who collaborate on these types of
projects belong to "different networks of practice" and thus may have
challenges with communicating about their preferred tools and methods
(650).

This article accomplishes one of its stated goals of addressing
"theoretical issues regarding metadata quality" and serves as a thorough
introduction to the kinds of problems metadata workers might encounter
(645). Their details of the development of the workflow for their own
institutional repository are equally interesting in proposing solutions
to metadata quality problems, but discussion of that element of the
article will have to wait for another day.

Works Cited

Ayla Stein, Kelly J. Applegate & Seth Robbins (2017) Achieving and
Maintaining Metadata Quality: Toward a Sustainable Workflow for the
IDEALS Institutional Repository, Cataloging & Classification Quarterly,
55:7-8, 644-666, DOI: 10.1080/01639374.2017.1358786
